Pointers are very powerful constructs in programming languages.
However there are some potential pitfalls that you should be aware of when using pointers in this video
will go over some of those pitfalls.
These include using uninitialized pointer as dangling or stray pointers not checking if new allocated
memory and leaking memory First let's look at uninitialized pointers.
We've seen these already but let's talk about them one more time.
Uninitialized pointers contain garbage which means they could point anywhere.
If we try to access or modify the data they're pointing to we could run into some major problems.
The pointer might be pointing to a very important area in memory and we could wipe it out.
Modern operating systems today are pretty good at protecting critical areas of system memory.
But you could still trash an area important to your program that could cause your program to crash.
Worst case scenario is that the program continues to work as expected for a long time since the memory
access isn't used.
Then an update to your program later on changes everything and all of a sudden the program is crashing.
You think it's because of the new change but it's actually a bug that's been in the code for a long
time.
In the old days of computing it wasn't uncommon to corrupt data on storage devices by using uninitialized
pointers.
Another potential problem with pointers is the dangling pointer.
Some cuts sometimes called Wilder stray pointers.
These are pointers that are pointing to memory that's no longer valid.
If you try to use these pointers to access that data you don't know what the results will be.
The main reasons for dangling pointers or returning addresses of function local variables on the stack
that are no longer valid since the function is terminated.
Another common scenario is that you allocate storage dynamically and assign it to a pointer variable.
Then you assign another pointer variable to point to that same storage.
Now you have two pointers pointing to the same area on the heap.
That's OK and we do it all the time.
The problem comes in when one of the pointers releases the memory but the other pointer is still referencing
to it and you use it again.
Unpredictable results can happen.
Best case is your program crashes during development and you fix these errors the next pointer pitfall
is not checking to see if you failed.
If new fails to allocate storage an exception is thrown and your program terminates.
We can use exception handling to get more fine grained control over these exceptional situations.
If you try to dereference a pointer which is pointing to no your program would crash.
This is good in testing but not good in production.
The last pointer pitfall will discuss is the memory leak.
This is probably right up there with the uninitialized pointer is the most common type of pointer related
error.
Memory leaks are easy to understand when you allocate storage dynamically on the heap.
This storage has no name.
It's simply an area of memory that's returned to you and you store the value in the pointer.
The only way to get to this memory is through the pointer.
But what if you lose the pointer.
Say you allocated the memory in a function and the pointer was declared in the function and the function
terminates.
Now you just lost your pointer.
There's no way you can reference that allocated memory on the heap.
This memory is still considered in use by C++.
So this is called in memory leak.
If you leak enough memory you could run out of storage on the heap for future allocations.
Memory leaks used to be much more problematic when memory was limited but there's still an error and
a sign of bad code.
As you can see the potential problems are well-understood and as you become more experienced with pointers
you become very aware of them and you don't make these mistakes.
Now that I've mentioned the pitfalls with using Rossie post plus pointers C++ has smart pointers now
that take care of many of these problems and are still very efficient.
There are more advanced topic and it's something that you should learn as you become more proficient
with C++ or revisit smart pointers in the context of object oriented programming in the next section.
Well that wraps up C plus plus pointers.
I hope I did a good job explaining them since they can be very intimidating.
Please let me know if you have any questions.
Practice with pointers write simple programs.
Print out the values of the pointers so that you can understand how to work with them and with memory.
OK now let's move on to references.